An operating system acts as an intermediary between programs and computer hardware for functions like input and output and memory allocation. The OS provides services to both users and programs, offering an environment for programs to execute and enabling users to run programs conveniently. These services are essential for running user and system programs.

All operating system services are implemented through [[System Calls]]
## User Services
These are services to enable user programs to utilize the computer system
1. **User Interface**: The OS provides an interface for the User to interact with the system. The UI must enable input and output communication between the system and the user, which can be achieved in many ways
	- *GUI*: A graphical user interface where the user communicates mainly through the display for output and using a mouse and keyboard for input
	- *CLI*: A command line interface where the user sends text commands/inputs and views outputs on the terminal, using a display and a keyboard.
	- *Touch Screen Interface:* Interface in mobile devices
2. **Program Execution:** OS should be able to load programs into memory and run them. It should handle dead-locks and synchronization problems. It should be able to terminate processes normally after execution, or abnormally when there is an error/exception.
3. **i/o operations:** Programs can access I/O devices indirectly through the OS. The OS is responsible for communicating with the I/O device controllers through  the I/O drivers. The OS also converts the requests of programs into i/o calls which the driver can understand and formats the output for the programs to use.
4. **File system Management**: Programs need access to create, delete, read and write files in the file-system. Since multiple file-systems may exist on the system, a VFS interface is used which acts as an abstraction layer for the programs to interact with and modify the file system. 
5. **Inter-process Communication:** Communication protocols and methods are implemented by the OS to enable processes to communicate. These processes may exist across different systems on a network, or on the same system.
	- Processes can access *shared* sections of memory where they read-write data to communicate and share information
	- Processes can use *message passing protocols* which allows information to be shared between processes in predetermined formats
6. **Error Detection:** The OS must be able to handle errors generated by user programs gracefully and take appropriate actions to handle these errors. There errors can be of many types which need to be communicated to the program. Ex: Memory errors, hardware errors, network errors, i/o device errors.\ Error-causing user programs are also terminated and handled
## System Services
These are services used by the OS for efficient operation and protection
1. **Resource allocation:** The OS uses various resources allocation strategies and algorithms to distribute tasks, memory, hardware access, i/o devices, file storage and cache across processes.
2. **Logging:** Tasks handled, errors generated and resources used by various processes are logged and stored by the OS for future reference. These statistics are used to mitigate further errors and issues
3. **Security and Protection:** The OS handles protection of resources to prevent unauthorized access, data corruption and malignant process from causing damage to the system and its data. 